---
categories: [Developing Tools]
date: 
  created: 2025-04-11
  updated: 2025-09-17
draft: false
comments: true
links: []
readtime: 10
slug: uv-cheatsheet
authors:
  - <qihang>
---
# UV Cheatsheet
[UV](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/) can serve as a faster and more efficient package manager for python. It's very easy to switch to uv if you used to use conda and pip. Here are the basic usage of uv.
<!-- more -->
## Overview
[TOC]

## How to install UV
```bash
curl -LsSf https://astral.sh/uv/install.sh | sh
```

## How to manage the virtual environment via UV
It's extremely easy to switch to uv if you used to use conda and pip. But uv is much more faster than conda. Here is a way similar to conda and pip to manage the python version and the dependencies via uv.

- To create a virtual environment:
```bash
uv venv
```

- To create a virtual environment at my-name(specific path):
```bash
uv venv my-name
```

- To create a virtual environment with specific python version:
```bash
uv venv --python 3.11
```

- To activate the environment:
```bash
source .venv/bin/activate
```

- To deactivate the environment:
```bash
deactivate
```

The dependencies management in virtual environment is very similar to pip.

- To install a package:
```bash
uv pip install <package>
```
- To uninstall a package:
```bash
uv pip uninstall <package>
```
- To list installed packages:
```bash
uv pip list
```

## **$\star$ How to manage the project via UV**
What is more convienient and elegant is that uv can manage the project along with its environment as well as corresponding dependencies. There is another way to manage the project and dependencies.

In each project, uv will create `pyproject.toml` file to manage the dependencies and update the environment according to the `pyproject.toml` file. Here is the way to manage the project and dependencies.

- To create a new project,cd to the project directory and run:
```bash
uv init
```
uv will create a `pyproject.toml` file.

- To create virtual environment according to the `pyproject.toml` file:
```bash
uv venv
```

- To update the environment according to the `pyproject.toml` file:
```bash
uv sync
```
- To run the program in the corresponding environment:
```bash
uv run <command>
```
`uv run` can directly run the program in the corresponding environment. It's similar to `source .venv/bin/activate` and `python <command>`. 

    Before running the program, uv will also automatically update the environment according to the pyproject.toml file. So `uv run` is the most convenient way to run any program in this project.

    - For example, if you want to run the program `main.py`, you can run:
    ```bash
    uv run main.py
    ```

    - if you want to run the shell script `script.sh`, you can run:
    ```bash
    uv run zsh script.sh
    ```

- To add the dependencies in the `pyproject.toml` file:
```bash
uv add <package>
```

- To remove the dependencies in the `pyproject.toml` file:
```bash
uv remove <package>
```

- To upgrade the dependencies in the `pyproject.toml` file:
```bash
uv lock --upgrade-package <package>
```
## How to manage the python version via UV

- To change the python version pinned in a project:
run the following command:
```bash
uv pin python 3.11
```
or directly edit the `.python-version` file.

## How to manage the cache of UV

- To clean the cache of UV:
run the following command:
```bash
uv cache clean
```

## How to insert multiple lines of command in `uv run`

+ Python Example:
```shell
uv run python - << 'PY'
import math

def f(x):
    return math.sin(x) ** 2

print(f(1.0))
PY
```
Except PY, `EOF、END、SCRIPT and xyz` can also be used to mark the end of the multi-line command.

+ Shell Example:
```shell
uv run zsh - << 'SCRIPT'
export WORKER_NUM=1024
echo "Worker num is set to ${WORKER_NUM}"
SCRIPT
```
```shell
uv run zsh -lc '
export WORKER_NUM=1024
echo "Worker num is set to ${WORKER_NUM}"
'
```
Using bash replaces zsh also works.
 
## [Link to UV's doc](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/)







